**PyCity Schools Challenge**


**(1) Project Overview and Purpose:**

In this exercise, student and financial data from a local school district is analyzed to support the school system making strategic decisions regarding future school budgets and priorities. Standardized test results will be aggregated to identify trends in school performance.


**(2) Dataset Description:**

The data for this exercise is stored in two separate Microsoft Excel (MS Excel) files, which are housed in the **Resources** folder:

(a) schools_complete.xls contains information of school identification (id number and name); type; size; and budget

(b) students_complete.xls contains student identification (id number and name); gender; grade; school name; and standardized test scores (reading and math)


**(3) Data Cleaning and Preprocessing:**


No data cleaning was required to starting the analysis, as there was no missing or incomplete information.


**(4) Data Visualization Techniques:**

DataFrames were generated to provide a tabular view of the analyses.

Tabular data in the form .csv files were also generated by request


**(5) Results and Analysis:**

(a) Here is a list of the key information identified during this analysis-

(i) District Summary-

- total number of unique schools
- total number of students
- total budget
- average (mean) math score
- average (mean) reading score
- percentage of students who passed math
- percentage of students who passed reading
- percentage of students that passed both math and reading


(ii) School Summary-
- total student count
- per capita spending
- average test scores
- number of schools with math scores of 70 or higher
- number of schools with reading scores of 70 or higher
- schools that passed both math and reading with scores of 70 or higher
- the passing rates


(iii) Highest-Performing Schools by Percentage of Overall Passing


(iv) Lowest-Performing Schools by Percentage of Overall Passing


(v) Math Scores by Grade


(vi) Reading Scores by Grade


(vii) Scores by School Spending


(viii) Scores by School Size (5 points)


(ix) Scores by School Type (5 points)


(b) Analysis-

There is a discernable difference in school performance within the district. It appears that contrasts amongst schools can be drawn based on several factors, namely:
(1) school budget,
(2) per capita budget,
(3) students per school, and
(4) test scores in Math and Reading.

The information generated for this exercise allow for certain conclusions to be drawn and can ultimately be the underlying logic to make future district level decisions.

(c) Conclusions-


- Charter schools are achieving higher test scores and larger segments of students passing than District schools, while consuming less budget at the school level and per capita level

- Schools with less than 2000 students, defined by two categories, Small (<1000 students) and Medium (1000-2000 students), having substantially higher passing rates for (1) Math, (2) Reading, and (3) Math + Reading

  
**(6) Ethical Considerations:**


This dataset does seem to contain sensitive information, namely school budget information; student identifiers; and student test scores. This dataset was handled with care and not disseminated outside this analysis.


**(7) Instructions for Interacting with the Project:**


(a) Code is stored in a file called "PyCitySchools_Roop.ipynb" within the **PyCitySchools** folder. The .ipynb file also contains important information stored in DataFrames with respect to 5a i - ix as listed above

(b) MS Excel files are stored in the **Resources** folder as noted above

(c) Output is stored in the **Output** folder-

(i) top_schools.csv

(ii) bottom_schools.csv


**(8) Citations:**


(a)   Aggregating statistics grouped by category. (2024). 
        Retrieved from https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/dev/getting_started/intro_tutorials/06_calculate_statistics.html/


(b)   Oyama, F. (2023, January 25). How to Use the Pandas DataFrame Groupby Method.
        Retrieved from https://www.theoceancleanup.com/updates/whales-likely-impacted-by-great-pacific-garbage-patch/


(c)   Xpert Learning Assistance. (2024, April 23). Retrieved from https://bootcampspot.instructure.com/courses/5079/external_tools/


        (i) When encountering an unknown error type during my work on Module Challenge 4, namely "FutureWarning: The default of observed=False is deprecated and will be changed to True in a future version of pandas. Pass 
        observed=False to retain current behavior or observed=True to adopt the future default and silence this warning...", Xpert Learning Assistant provided the following advice with led to a change in my code (since we 
        did not see a similar error during classes or exercises):

        
        (ii) "The warning message you are seeing is a FutureWarning indicating a change in behavior that will occur in a future version of pandas. To address this warning and ensure your code runs without issues in the future   
         versions of pandas, you can explicitly set observed=True in the groupby operation.

         You can modify your code as follows to address the warning:

         spending_math_scores = school_spending_df.groupby(["Spending Ranges (Per Student)"], observed=True)["Average Math Score"].mean()

         By explicitly setting observed=True, you will adopt the future default behavior and silence the warning. This adjustment will ensure that your code continues to work as expected in future versions of pandas."
